---
status: "draft"
date: "2026-02-21"
summary: "What are the differences between noise and jitter"
---

If you have worked with DSP, or music production, you probably have seen the terms "noise" and "jitter" thrown around. But what are they exactly? And how do they differ from each other?

# 1. Noise

## 1.1. What is Noise?

The simplest way to explain it is the own definition of 'noise' - **unwanted sound**.
When you record a sound, you want it to be as perfect as possible. But in reality, whatever you're trying to record is usually surrounded by other sounds that you don't want to record. These sounds are **noise**.

Why is noise so important though? Why does it appear so much in so many areas?

The fact of it being so common is what makes it so important. Conceptually every sound we hear has some noise mixed in it. And if we want to produce any type of artifical sound that sounds realistic, we need to add some noise to it. There's no way around it. Without random fluctuations, it sounds unnatural.

## 1.2. So, how is noise defined?

We can define noise as:

> Random fluctuation in the amplitude of a signal

Yes - it's that simple. Audio waves are just amplitude values over time. So if we have some random fluctuation in the amplitude, we have noise - we introduce some randomness to the signal.

So in mathematical terms, we can define noise as:

$$y[s] = x[s] + n[s]$$

Where $y[s]$ is the noisy signal, $x[s]$ is the original signal, and $n[s]$ is the noise signal. The noise signal can be anything, as long as it's random. It can be white noise, pink noise, brown noise, or any other type of noise. We will see what these "colors" mean later. 

But a spoiler - white noise is what you are most familiar with - it's the sound of static on an untuned radio.

## 1.3 Noise has colors

The color of noise refers to its **Power Spectral Density (PSD)** — essentially, how its energy is distributed across the frequency spectrum.

### A. White Noise

**The Math** 

White noise has equal energy per frequency (Hz). The power is constant across the entire spectrum. So at each sample *n*, the **amplitude is random and independent of the previous samples**. That is, it has absolutely **no memory of the past**:

$$n_{white}[s] = random[s]$$

It is basically the same as tossing a coin for each new sample. The result of current coin toss is independent of the previous coin toss.

**The Sound** 

Because human ears are more sensitive to high frequencies, and because there are mathematically way more high frequencies than low ones (there are 10,000 Hz between 10kHz and 20kHz, but only 20 Hz between 20Hz and 40Hz), white noise sounds incredibly harsh, bright, and hissy. Think of old TV static or a steam leak.

### B. Brown Noise

**The Math** 

Brown noise (or red noise) is a "random walk." It is generated by taking the previous noise value and adding a tiny random change to it. In calculus, this is called integration; in DSP, it is called a running sum or an accumulator.

$$n_{brown}[s] = n_{brown}[s-1] + random[s]$$


<iframe src="simulations/brown_noise.html" width="100%" height="600px"></iframe>